Revise details for control plane taints / labels (#40636)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/_index.md

Reviewer: Is there a citation about the EndpointSlice controller ignoring control plane nodes? I didn't know about that behavior.

Author: Hi @sftim,
I also not aware of this behaviour, but this information is already documented [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-routing/#constraints) under **topology-aware-routing** page. and this information was added by PR #40069 at the time of v1.27 release.

Used on: Node

> Label that kubeadm applies on the control plane nodes that it manages. If this label set, [EndpointSlice controller](/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-routing/#implementation-control-plane) ignores that node.

Reviewer: This is a specific detail and actually _lots_ of things pay attention to this label. We could list some of them. I think listing just one use might come over as misleading.

Author: Hi @sftim,
Thanks for the feedback, i have written below a few points as per my investigation on this label use case. can you review it.
 
It is a restricted label and kubeadm manually applies it using a privileged client after a node has been created. control-plane nodes are scaled automatically using this label:
      • Attaching this label to a node results in deploying control plane components on this node, connecting the new etcd node to the etcd cluster, and regenerating all the necessary certificates and config files.
      • Removing this label results in deleting all control plane components on a node, gracefully removing it from the etcd cluster, and regenerating all the necessary config files and certificates.

Please suggest,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A marker label to indicate that the node is used to run
{{< glossary_tooltip text="control plane" term_id="control-plane" >}} components.
The kubeadm tool applies this label to the control plane nodes that it manages.
Other cluster management tools typically also set this taint.

You can label control plane nodes with this label to make it easier to schedule Pods only onto these
nodes, or to avoid running Pods on the control plane.
```

Reviewer: > • Attaching this label to a node results in deploying control plane components on this node, connecting the new etcd node to the etcd cluster, and regenerating all the necessary certificates and config files.

No, that's not true.

> • Removing this label results in deleting all control plane components on a node, gracefully removing it from the etcd cluster, and regenerating all the necessary config files and certificates.

No, that's not true.

Sorry to be so strong here but Kubernetes doesn't work how you're stating it does. These labels are managed by cluster lifecycle management tools such as `kubeadm`. Adding this label to a node doesn't set it up as part of your control plane.

### node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane {#node-role-kubernetes-io-control-plane-taint}

Used on: Node

Example: `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane:NoSchedule`

> Taint that kubeadm applies on control plane nodes to allow only critical workloads to schedule on them. If this taint set, EndpointSlice controller ignores that node.

Reviewer: Which does the EndpointSlice controller check for? The taint, the label, or neither?

Author: Hi @sftim,
With the same confusion as you, i just added it on both label and taint. and waiting for someone to comment on it to know the correct behaviour.

Used on: Node

A marker label to indicate that the node is used to run {{< glossary_tooltip text="control plane" term_id="control-plane" >}} components. The kubeadm tool applies this label to the control plane nodes that it manages. Other cluster management tools typically also set this taint.

You can label control plane nodes with this label to make it easier to schedule Pods only onto these nodes, or to avoid running Pods on the control plane. If this label set, [EndpointSlice controller](/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-routing/#implementation-control-plane) ignores that node.

### node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane {#node-role-kubernetes-io-control-plane-taint}

Used on: Node

Taint that kubeadm applies on control plane nodes to restrict placing pods and allow only specific pods to schedule on them.

Example: `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane:NoSchedule`

> If this Taint applied, control plane nodes allow only critical workloads to schedule on them. You can manually remove this taint with `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane:NoSchedule-`

Author: Hi @stmcginnis,
Applied the suggestions, thanks.

Used on: Node

A marker label to indicate that the node is used to run {{< glossary_tooltip text="control plane" term_id="control-plane" >}} components. The kubeadm tool applies this label to the control plane nodes that it manages. Other cluster management tools typically also set this taint.

> You can label control plane nodes with this label to make it easier to schedule Pods only onto these nodes, or to avoid running Pods on the control plane. If this label is set, [EndpointSlice controller](/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-routing/#implementation-control-plane) ignores that node while calculating Topology Aware Hints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can label control plane nodes with this label to make it easier to schedule Pods
only onto these nodes, or to avoid running workload Pods on the control plane.
If this label is set on a Node, the
[EndpointSlice controller](/docs/concepts/services-networking/topology-aware-routing/#implementation-control-plane)
ignores that node while calculating Topology Aware Hints.
```

### node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane {#node-role-kubernetes-io-control-plane-taint}

Used on: Node

Taint that kubeadm applies on control plane nodes to restrict placing pods and allow only specific pods to schedule on them.

Example: `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane:NoSchedule`

> If this Taint is applied, control plane nodes allow only critical workloads to schedule on them. You can manually remove this taint with the following command on a specific node.

Reviewer: nit: “taint” (lower case)

Taint that kubeadm previously applied on control plane nodes to allow only critical workloads to schedule on them.
Replaced by [`node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane`](#node-role-kubernetes-io-control-plane-taint); kubeadm
no longer sets or uses this deprecated taint.
{{< note >}}
The EndpointSlice controller ignores nodes with the `node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane` or `node-role.kubernetes.io/master` label set.

> {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: Is this true?

Author: Hi @reylejano, @robscott 
Can you please comment on this.
